README.md, before:

# Real-Time Market Data Application

This repository contains the codebase for a real-time crypto market data application that fetches and displays financial market information. The application is powered by Node.JS, PostgreSQL and integrates with Tiingo and Alpha Vantage APIs for live data.

## Setup

Follow these steps to set up and run the application locally:

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
# Clone the repository to your local machine
git clone https://github.com/pubuduudara/Real-Time-Market-Data-Application.git

cd Real-Time-Market-Data-Application
#run
npm install
```

### 2. Use `.env` File in the project root

Create a `.env` file in the root of the project and add the following configuration:

```plaintext
DB_HOST=localhost
DB_USERNAME=postgres
DB_PASSWORD=password
DB_NAME=market-data
DB_PORT=5441
API_PORT=3000
CRYPTO_TIINGO_WEB_SOCKET=wss://api.tiingo.com/crypto
TINGO_AUTH_KEY=
VALID_API_KEYS=abcd
```

#### Configuration Details:

- **Database Configuration:**

  - `DB_HOST`: The hostname of your PostgreSQL database (e.g., `localhost`).
  - `DB_USERNAME`: Your PostgreSQL username (e.g., `postgres`).
  - `DB_PASSWORD`: Your PostgreSQL password.
  - `DB_NAME`: The name of the PostgreSQL database (e.g., `market-data`).
  - `DB_PORT`: The port PostgreSQL is running on (default: `5441`).

- **API Configuration:**

  - `CRYPTO_TIINGO_WEB_SOCKET`: The WebSocket URL for Tiingo's crypto API (`wss://api.tiingo.com/crypto`).
  - `TINGO_AUTH_KEY`: Obtain your authentication key from [Tiingo](https://www.tiingo.com/).

- **Authentication Configuration:**
- `VALID_API_KEYS`: Comma-separated list of valid API keys for authenticating requests. (Note: this should be passed in each REST API header. use `x-api-key` as the header key)

### 3. Obtain API Keys

#### Tiingo API Key:

1. Visit [Tiingo](https://www.tiingo.com/).
2. Sign up or log in to your account.
3. Generate an API key and update the `TINGO_AUTH_KEY` field in the `.env` file.

### 4. Create a PostgreSQL Database

1. Install PostgreSQL if it’s not already installed.
2. Open your terminal and log in to PostgreSQL:

   ```bash
   psql -U postgres
   ```

3. Create a database:

   ```sql
   CREATE DATABASE "market-data";
   ```

4. Ensure the credentials (`DB_HOST`, `DB_USERNAME`, `DB_PASSWORD`, `DB_NAME`, `DB_PORT`) match those in your `.env` file.

### 5. Set Up Database Tables

Run the following SQL commands to create the necessary tables:

```sql
CREATE TABLE public."CryptoTrades" (
	id uuid NOT NULL DEFAULT gen_random_uuid(),
	ticker varchar NOT NULL,
	"timeStamp" timestamptz NOT NULL,
	exchange varchar NOT NULL,
	"lastSize" float8 NOT NULL,
	"lastPrice" float8 NOT NULL,
	CONSTRAINT deferred_sync_assets_and_exchanges TRIGGER DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED,
	CONSTRAINT newtable_pk PRIMARY KEY (id)
);

CREATE TABLE public."Exchanges" (
	id uuid NOT NULL,
	"name" varchar NOT NULL,
	createdat timestamp NOT NULL DEFAULT now(),
	CONSTRAINT exchanges_pk PRIMARY KEY (id),
	CONSTRAINT exchanges_un UNIQUE (name)
);

CREATE TABLE public."CryptoAssets" (
	id uuid NOT NULL DEFAULT gen_random_uuid(),
	ticker varchar NOT NULL,
	"createdAt" timestamp NOT NULL DEFAULT now(),
	CONSTRAINT cryptoassets_pk PRIMARY KEY (id),
	CONSTRAINT cryptoassets_un UNIQUE (ticker)
);

```

### 6. Set Up Triggers and Stored Procedures

Run the following SQL commands to create necessary triggers and stored procedures:

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION sync_assets_and_exchanges()
RETURNS TRIGGER AS $$
BEGIN
    -- Sync CryptoAssets
    IF NOT EXISTS (
        SELECT 1 FROM public."CryptoAssets" WHERE ticker = NEW.ticker
    ) THEN
        INSERT INTO public."CryptoAssets" (ticker)
        VALUES (NEW.ticker);
    END IF;

    -- Sync Exchanges
    IF NOT EXISTS (
        SELECT 1 FROM public."Exchanges" WHERE name = NEW.exchange
    ) THEN
        INSERT INTO public."Exchanges" (id, name)
        VALUES (gen_random_uuid(), NEW.exchange);
    END IF;

    RETURN NEW;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;


CREATE CONSTRAINT TRIGGER deferred_sync_assets_and_exchanges
AFTER INSERT ON public."MarketTrades"
DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED
FOR EACH ROW
EXECUTE FUNCTION sync_assets_and_exchanges();
```

## Project Structure

The project is structured as follows:

- **`src/`**: Contains the source code.
  - **`main.feed.ts`**: Script to consume data from the Tiingo crypto WebSocket. Use `npm run run:feed` to execute.
  - **`main.rest.ts`**: Script to expose REST APIs for fetching data. Use `npm run run:rest` to execute.

## Commands

The following commands can be executed from the terminal:

- `npm run run:feed`: Consumes data from the Tiingo crypto WebSocket and saves it to the database.
- `npm run run:rest`: Starts the REST API server for data access.

## Design Considerations

The design of the application incorporates separate processes for different functionalities to leverage Node.js effectively. Here are the key considerations:

1. **Separate Run Commands**:

   - Node.js operates on a single-threaded event loop, making it susceptible to blocking if multiple intensive tasks run within the same process.
   - To avoid such blocking, separate processes are designed for each key operation:
     - `npm run run:feed`: Fetches real-time crypto market data, stores it in the database, and streams it to the frontend via a dedicated WebSocket connection in real-time.
     - `npm run run:rest`: Exposes REST APIs for retrieving crypto market data.
   - This separation ensures high performance, scalability, and responsiveness by isolating tasks into manageable units.

2. **Triggers and Stored Procedures**:

   - The application leverages PostgreSQL triggers and stored procedures to automate data synchronization and enforce data consistency:
     - **Trigger:** Automatically syncs new entries in the `MarketTrades` table with the `CryptoAssets` and `Exchanges` tables.
     - **Stored Procedure:** Handles the logic to check for existing records and inserts missing data, ensuring that the database remains consistent without manual intervention.

3. **Batch Processing with Buffering and Scheduled Saves**:

   - When consuming data from the Tiingo crypto WebSocket, the application employs a buffering mechanism to collect incoming data over a short period.
   - This buffered data is then saved to the database in batches at scheduled intervals.
   - Batch processing reduces the frequency of database write operations, enhancing performance and reducing the risk of bottlenecks.

4. **API Key Authentication**:
   - The application secures API endpoints using an API key-based authentication mechanism.
   - Valid API keys are configured via the VALID_API_KEYS environment variable.
   - This approach ensures only authorized clients can access the application, enhancing security and preventing unauthorized usage.

Commit message:

update readme with test commands

README.md, after:

# Real-Time Market Data Application

This repository contains the codebase for a real-time crypto market data application that fetches and displays financial market information. The application is powered by Node.JS, PostgreSQL and integrates with Tiingo and Alpha Vantage APIs for live data.

## Setup

Follow these steps to set up and run the application locally:

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
# Clone the repository to your local machine
git clone https://github.com/pubuduudara/Real-Time-Market-Data-Application.git

cd Real-Time-Market-Data-Application
#run
npm install
```

### 2. Use `.env` File in the project root

Create a `.env` file in the root of the project and add the following configuration:

```plaintext
DB_HOST=localhost
DB_USERNAME=postgres
DB_PASSWORD=password
DB_NAME=market-data
DB_PORT=5441
API_PORT=3000
CRYPTO_TIINGO_WEB_SOCKET=wss://api.tiingo.com/crypto
TINGO_AUTH_KEY=
VALID_API_KEYS=abcd
```

#### Configuration Details:

- **Database Configuration:**

  - `DB_HOST`: The hostname of your PostgreSQL database (e.g., `localhost`).
  - `DB_USERNAME`: Your PostgreSQL username (e.g., `postgres`).
  - `DB_PASSWORD`: Your PostgreSQL password.
  - `DB_NAME`: The name of the PostgreSQL database (e.g., `market-data`).
  - `DB_PORT`: The port PostgreSQL is running on (default: `5441`).

- **API Configuration:**

  - `CRYPTO_TIINGO_WEB_SOCKET`: The WebSocket URL for Tiingo's crypto API (`wss://api.tiingo.com/crypto`).
  - `TINGO_AUTH_KEY`: Obtain your authentication key from [Tiingo](https://www.tiingo.com/).

- **Authentication Configuration:**
- `VALID_API_KEYS`: Comma-separated list of valid API keys for authenticating requests. (Note: this should be passed in each REST API header. use `x-api-key` as the header key)

### 3. Obtain API Keys

#### Tiingo API Key:

1. Visit [Tiingo](https://www.tiingo.com/).
2. Sign up or log in to your account.
3. Generate an API key and update the `TINGO_AUTH_KEY` field in the `.env` file.

### 4. Create a PostgreSQL Database

1. Install PostgreSQL if it’s not already installed.
2. Open your terminal and log in to PostgreSQL:

   ```bash
   psql -U postgres
   ```

3. Create a database:

   ```sql
   CREATE DATABASE "market-data";
   ```

4. Ensure the credentials (`DB_HOST`, `DB_USERNAME`, `DB_PASSWORD`, `DB_NAME`, `DB_PORT`) match those in your `.env` file.

### 5. Set Up Database Tables

Run the following SQL commands to create the necessary tables:

```sql
CREATE TABLE public."CryptoTrades" (
	id uuid NOT NULL DEFAULT gen_random_uuid(),
	ticker varchar NOT NULL,
	"timeStamp" timestamptz NOT NULL,
	exchange varchar NOT NULL,
	"lastSize" float8 NOT NULL,
	"lastPrice" float8 NOT NULL,
	CONSTRAINT deferred_sync_assets_and_exchanges TRIGGER DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED,
	CONSTRAINT newtable_pk PRIMARY KEY (id)
);

CREATE TABLE public."Exchanges" (
	id uuid NOT NULL,
	"name" varchar NOT NULL,
	createdat timestamp NOT NULL DEFAULT now(),
	CONSTRAINT exchanges_pk PRIMARY KEY (id),
	CONSTRAINT exchanges_un UNIQUE (name)
);

CREATE TABLE public."CryptoAssets" (
	id uuid NOT NULL DEFAULT gen_random_uuid(),
	ticker varchar NOT NULL,
	"createdAt" timestamp NOT NULL DEFAULT now(),
	CONSTRAINT cryptoassets_pk PRIMARY KEY (id),
	CONSTRAINT cryptoassets_un UNIQUE (ticker)
);

```

### 6. Set Up Triggers and Stored Procedures

Run the following SQL commands to create necessary triggers and stored procedures:

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION sync_assets_and_exchanges()
RETURNS TRIGGER AS $$
BEGIN
    -- Sync CryptoAssets
    IF NOT EXISTS (
        SELECT 1 FROM public."CryptoAssets" WHERE ticker = NEW.ticker
    ) THEN
        INSERT INTO public."CryptoAssets" (ticker)
        VALUES (NEW.ticker);
    END IF;

    -- Sync Exchanges
    IF NOT EXISTS (
        SELECT 1 FROM public."Exchanges" WHERE name = NEW.exchange
    ) THEN
        INSERT INTO public."Exchanges" (id, name)
        VALUES (gen_random_uuid(), NEW.exchange);
    END IF;

    RETURN NEW;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;


CREATE CONSTRAINT TRIGGER deferred_sync_assets_and_exchanges
AFTER INSERT ON public."MarketTrades"
DEFERRABLE INITIALLY DEFERRED
FOR EACH ROW
EXECUTE FUNCTION sync_assets_and_exchanges();
```

## Project Structure

The project is structured as follows:

- **`src/`**: Contains the source code.
  - **`main.feed.ts`**: Script to consume data from the Tiingo crypto WebSocket. Use `npm run run:feed` to execute.
  - **`main.rest.ts`**: Script to expose REST APIs for fetching data. Use `npm run run:rest` to execute.

## Commands

The following commands can be executed from the terminal:

- `npm run run:feed`: Consumes data from the Tiingo crypto WebSocket and saves it to the database and publish to connected frontend clients.
- `npm run run:rest`: Starts the REST API server for data access.
- `npm run test:unit`: Executes unit test cases
- `npm run test:integration`: Executes integration test cases
- `npm run test`: Executes all test cases

## Design Considerations

The design of the application incorporates separate processes for different functionalities to leverage Node.js effectively. Here are the key considerations:

1. **Separate Run Commands**:

   - Node.js operates on a single-threaded event loop, making it susceptible to blocking if multiple intensive tasks run within the same process.
   - To avoid such blocking, separate processes are designed for each key operation:
     - `npm run run:feed`: Fetches real-time crypto market data, stores it in the database, and streams it to the frontend via a dedicated WebSocket connection in real-time.
     - `npm run run:rest`: Exposes REST APIs for retrieving crypto market data.
   - This separation ensures high performance, scalability, and responsiveness by isolating tasks into manageable units.

2. **Triggers and Stored Procedures**:

   - The application leverages PostgreSQL triggers and stored procedures to automate data synchronization and enforce data consistency:
     - **Trigger:** Automatically syncs new entries in the `MarketTrades` table with the `CryptoAssets` and `Exchanges` tables.
     - **Stored Procedure:** Handles the logic to check for existing records and inserts missing data, ensuring that the database remains consistent without manual intervention.

3. **Batch Processing with Buffering and Scheduled Saves**:

   - When consuming data from the Tiingo crypto WebSocket, the application employs a buffering mechanism to collect incoming data over a short period.
   - This buffered data is then saved to the database in batches at scheduled intervals.
   - Batch processing reduces the frequency of database write operations, enhancing performance and reducing the risk of bottlenecks.

4. **API Key Authentication**:
   - The application secures API endpoints using an API key-based authentication mechanism.
   - Valid API keys are configured via the VALID_API_KEYS environment variable.
   - This approach ensures only authorized clients can access the application, enhancing security and preventing unauthorized usage.
